
   Skip to main content
   ABC News Homepage
   Search
   Loading

More from ABC


Editorial Policies

   Read our editorial guiding principles



   News HomeABC News Homepage

   Opposition labels China's denial of sonar incident propaganda

Opposition labels China's denial of sonar incident propaganda

   By political reporter Georgia Roberts
   Posted Tue 21 Nov 2023 at 1:55amTuesday 21 Nov 2023 at 1:55amTue 21 Nov
   2023 at 1:55am
   Loading...
   abc.net.au/news/china-denies-sonar-incident-peter-dutton-says-it-is-pro
   paganda/103130288

   China's denial that it sent sonar pulses that left Australian naval
   divers with minor injuries has been labelled propaganda by the

Key points:

       mission in the East China Sea
       to the sonar incident
       robust response

   HMAS Toowoomba had been operating in the East China Sea, within Japan's
   exclusive economic zone, in support of a United Nations mission to
   enforce sanctions when the incident occurred.

   Naval divers were working to clear fishing nets from the Australian
   frigate's propellers when the Chinese warship began operating its
   hull-mounted sonar.

   Defence Minister Richard Marles said the sonar was activated despite
   the Chinese ship receiving multiple warnings that the personnel were

   "Despite acknowledging Toowoomba's communications, the Chinese vessel
   approached at a closer range. Soon after, it was detected operating its
   hull-mounted sonar in a manner that posed a risk to the safety of the
   Australian divers who were forced to exit the water," the minister said
   in a statement.

   China's defence ministry denied carrying out any activities that might
   have affected Australian diving operations: "China kept a safe distance
   from the Australian ship," a statement from its defence ministry said.

   On Monday Prime Minister Anthony Albanese, speaking before Beijing
   denied the incident, said the Chinese vessel's use of its sonar was
   "dangerous, it was unsafe and unprofessional".

   He added the naval incident was harmful to efforts to repair relations
   between the two countries.

   "This certainly is an event that does do damage and we've made that
   very clear to China," he said.

   Mr Albanese did not say when the government raised its concerns with
   China, or to whom it made representations — a lack of detail that has
   been criticised by the opposition.

   The federal government has been on a campaign to stabilise relations
   with China following years of diplomatic relations being in a deep
   freeze and trade sanctions being imposed by China on several Australian
   exports.

Xi's diplomacy game is on show

   Just days before Xi Jinping and Anthony Albanese shook hands at the
   APEC summit, Australian divers were injured by Chinese sonar. It begs
   the question, is the on-stage diplomacy all for show?
   Anthony Albanese smiles while shaking hands with Xi Jinping, whose head
   is turned away from camera
   Read more

   Since Labor's election, diplomatic communications have restarted, trade
   bans have lifted, and earlier this month Mr Albanese became the first
   prime minister since 2016 to officially visit Beijing.

   Chinese Defence Ministry spokesman Wu Qian, speaking to China Daily,
   labelled Australia's comments on the sonar incident as "completely
   untrue".

   Wu went on to urge Australia to "stop making reckless and irresponsible
   accusations against China" and "to create a positive atmosphere for the
   sound development of relations between the two countries and two
   militaries".

   On Tuesday, Opposition Leader Peter Dutton said China's denial of the
   sonar incident was "propaganda and we shouldn't abide it for a second".

   "It's exactly what happens in relation to Japan, in relation to the
   Philippines, and in relation to other countries in the region," Mr
   Dutton said.

   "The fact is that there is aggressive behaviour taking place and our
   country should call it out."

   Clashes between Philippine and Chinese vessels have been occurring
   and Beijing were heightened by the presence of a Chinese surveillance
   ship operating off the West Australian coast, close to a secretive
   naval communications base at Exmouth.
   Posted 21 Nov 202321 Nov 2023Tue 21 Nov 2023 at 1:55am
   Share

   More on:

Top Stories


Roofs torn off homes by storm after NSW swelters through early summer
heatwave
       Analysis by David Taylor

Interest rate hikes are hurting, no doubt, but there's a way bigger drain on
your household budget

'This is a diagnosis I never wanted to hear': Chris Evert is undergoing
chemotherapy after the return of cancer

Police arrest 72 climate protesters in heart of Melbourne for failing to obey
traffic direction

Six French teenagers convicted for their part in beheading of teacher who
showed Prophet Mohammed cartoons

'I don't want to raise my kids into this': Families left with no choice but
to live in tents in the bush

Texas Supreme Court temporarily blocks woman from emergency abortion

Fire ants are on the march. Here’s what happens when they sting

Cyclone Jasper is 'unusually slow' but could re-intensify as it crosses the
Queensland coast

'Never seen anything like this': Abattoir facing export suspension after
footage released

Australian artist dropped by gallery of 36 years over performance that
referenced Israel-Gaza War

Israeli troops round up Palestinian men in northern Gaza as US blocks
ceasefire bid at UN Security Council

Laukkai is a notorious den of online scams — and the prize in one family's
14-year quest for revenge

Liquor restrictions have reduced crime by 40 per cent in this outback town —
so what's next?

From Hong Kong to Katanning — the church-turned-Chinese restaurant telling an
Australian success story

Popular Now

   1.

'This is a diagnosis I never wanted to hear': Chris Evert is undergoing
chemotherapy after the return of cancer

   Chris Evert speaks into a microphone, wearing a sleevless dress and a
   watch on her wrist
   2.

Roofs torn off homes by storm after NSW swelters through early summer
heatwave

   torn off roofs at wyong after a storm caused destruction
   3.

Six French teenagers convicted for their part in beheading of teacher who
showed Prophet Mohammed cartoons

   Flowers are laid out on the ground with a sign saying "Je suis Samuel",
   meaning "I am Samuel"
   4.
   David Taylor
   Analysis by David Taylor

analysis:Interest rate hikes are hurting, no doubt, but there's a way bigger
drain on your household budget

   A man wearing a suit in front of an Australian flag.
   5.

Texas Supreme Court temporarily blocks woman from emergency abortion

   A pregnant woman faces a pile of documents
   6.

Fire ants are on the march. Here’s what happens when they sting

   Fire ant in extreme close up on a stick

Top Stories

    1.

Roofs torn off homes by storm after NSW swelters through early summer
heatwave
       torn off roofs at wyong after a storm caused destruction
    2. David Taylor
       Analysis by David Taylor

Interest rate hikes are hurting, no doubt, but there's a way bigger drain on
your household budget
    3.

'This is a diagnosis I never wanted to hear': Chris Evert is undergoing
chemotherapy after the return of cancer
    4.

Police arrest 72 climate protesters in heart of Melbourne for failing to obey
traffic direction
    5.

Six French teenagers convicted for their part in beheading of teacher who
showed Prophet Mohammed cartoons

Just In


'This is a diagnosis I never wanted to hear': Chris Evert is undergoing
chemotherapy after the return of cancer
       1h ago1 hours agoSat 9 Dec 2023 at 1:18pm

Six French teenagers convicted for their part in beheading of teacher who
showed Prophet Mohammed cartoons
       5h ago5 hours agoSat 9 Dec 2023 at 10:11am

Police arrest 72 climate protesters in heart of Melbourne for failing to obey
traffic direction
       6h ago6 hours agoSat 9 Dec 2023 at 8:54am

Texas Supreme Court temporarily blocks woman from emergency abortion
       6h ago6 hours agoSat 9 Dec 2023 at 8:26am

   More Just In
   Back to top

Footer

   ABC News homepage
   More From ABC NEWS

   We acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the
   First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we
   live, learn, and work.

Sections


News in language


Connect with ABC News


More from ABC News


   This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP),
   APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright
   and cannot be reproduced.

   AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT
