   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-PB2GX

   Skip to main content
   ABC News Homepage
   Search
   Loading
   (BUTTON) More from ABC

More from ABC

   (BUTTON) Close menuABC
     * ABC Home
     * News
     * Local
     * listen
     * iview
     * Everyday
     * More

Editorial Policies

   Read our editorial guiding principles
     * Accessibility
     * Help
     * Contact Us
     * About the ABC
     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms of Use
     * © 2023 ABC

     *
     *
     *
     *

     * Just In
     * Watch Live
     * Politics
     * World
     * Business
     * Analysis
     * Sport
     * Science
     * Health
     * Entertainment
     * Lifestyle
     * Fact Check
     * Other

   News HomeABC News Homepage

   Opposition labels China's denial of sonar incident propaganda
   (BUTTON) Share

Opposition labels China's denial of sonar incident propaganda

   By political reporter Georgia Roberts
   Posted Tue 21 Nov 2023 at 1:55amTuesday 21 Nov 2023 at 1:55amTue 21 Nov
   2023 at 1:55am
   Loading...
   Help keep family & friends informed by sharing this article (BUTTON)
   abc.net.au/news/china-denies-sonar-incident-peter-dutton-says-it-is-pro
   paganda/103130288
   Link copied
   (BUTTON) Copy link (BUTTON) Share

   China's denial that it sent sonar pulses that left Australian naval
   divers with minor injuries has been labelled propaganda by the
   opposition.

Key points:

     * A Chinese warship's sonar has harmed Australian divers during a UN
       mission in the East China Sea
     * China denies the incident and has criticised Australia's reaction
       to the sonar incident
     * The opposition has dismissed China's denial as propaganda, urging a
       robust response

   HMAS Toowoomba had been operating in the East China Sea, within Japan's
   exclusive economic zone, in support of a United Nations mission to
   enforce sanctions when the incident occurred.

   Naval divers were working to clear fishing nets from the Australian
   frigate's propellers when the Chinese warship began operating its
   hull-mounted sonar.

   Defence Minister Richard Marles said the sonar was activated despite
   the Chinese ship receiving multiple warnings that the personnel were
   operating below the surface.

   "Despite acknowledging Toowoomba's communications, the Chinese vessel
   approached at a closer range. Soon after, it was detected operating its
   hull-mounted sonar in a manner that posed a risk to the safety of the
   Australian divers who were forced to exit the water," the minister said
   in a statement.

   China's defence ministry denied carrying out any activities that might
   have affected Australian diving operations: "China kept a safe distance
   from the Australian ship," a statement from its defence ministry said.

   On Monday Prime Minister Anthony Albanese, speaking before Beijing
   denied the incident, said the Chinese vessel's use of its sonar was
   "dangerous, it was unsafe and unprofessional".

   He added the naval incident was harmful to efforts to repair relations
   between the two countries.

   "This certainly is an event that does do damage and we've made that
   very clear to China," he said.

   Mr Albanese did not say when the government raised its concerns with
   China, or to whom it made representations — a lack of detail that has
   been criticised by the opposition.

   The federal government has been on a campaign to stabilise relations
   with China following years of diplomatic relations being in a deep
   freeze and trade sanctions being imposed by China on several Australian
   exports.

Xi's diplomacy game is on show

   Just days before Xi Jinping and Anthony Albanese shook hands at the
   APEC summit, Australian divers were injured by Chinese sonar. It begs
   the question, is the on-stage diplomacy all for show?
   Anthony Albanese smiles while shaking hands with Xi Jinping, whose head
   is turned away from camera
   Read more

   Since Labor's election, diplomatic communications have restarted, trade
   bans have lifted, and earlier this month Mr Albanese became the first
   prime minister since 2016 to officially visit Beijing.

   Chinese Defence Ministry spokesman Wu Qian, speaking to China Daily,
   labelled Australia's comments on the sonar incident as "completely
   untrue".

   Wu went on to urge Australia to "stop making reckless and irresponsible
   accusations against China" and "to create a positive atmosphere for the
   sound development of relations between the two countries and two
   militaries".

   On Tuesday, Opposition Leader Peter Dutton said China's denial of the
   sonar incident was "propaganda and we shouldn't abide it for a second".

   "It's exactly what happens in relation to Japan, in relation to the
   Philippines, and in relation to other countries in the region," Mr
   Dutton said.

   "The fact is that there is aggressive behaviour taking place and our
   country should call it out."

   Clashes between Philippine and Chinese vessels have been occurring
   often in recent months, and in May last year tensions between Canberra
   and Beijing were heightened by the presence of a Chinese surveillance
   ship operating off the West Australian coast, close to a secretive
   naval communications base at Exmouth.
   Posted 21 Nov 202321 Nov 2023Tue 21 Nov 2023 at 1:55am
   Share
     * Copy link
     * Facebook
     * X (formerly Twitter)
     * (BUTTON)

   More on:
     * Australia
     * Defence Forces
     * Defence and National Security
     * Federal Government
     * Foreign Affairs
     * Government and Politics
     * Navy
     * World Politics

Top Stories

     *

Brittany Higgins details alleged rape as she takes the stand in Bruce
Lehrmann's defamation action
     *

Wong and Dutton press top Chinese official over ‘unsafe, unprofessional’
warship conduct
     *

Sydney woman was last seen getting into a stranger's car. Twelve months later
he's refusing to talk to police
     *

Aboriginal elders 'at a loss' after SA council removes Acknowledgement of
Country from documents
     *

Most Women's World Cup players had 'insufficient' support, survey finds
     *

‘It happens more than you think’: More than 500 e-scooter riders have ended
up in hospital during Melbourne trial
     *

'Just one dose was enough to inflict a lifetime of damage': Thalidomide
survivors reflect on their national apology
     *

'What's to be afraid of?': Cannabis stunt pulled in NSW parliament during
legalisation bill bid
     *

RBA boss says rate rises have 'created a lot of noise' but most Australians
'are actually in a pretty good position'
     *

One dead after US military aircraft crashes in Japan sea, after fatal
accident at Darwin in August
     *

Storms lash eastern Australia, bringing record rainfall and flash flooding
     *

Nearly 1 million Australians have unclaimed Medicare benefits waiting for
them
     *

Plane powered by fat becomes first jetliner to fly fossil fuel-free from
London to New York
     *

Jimmy Carter, 99, makes rare public appearance at his wife Rosalynn's
memorial
     *

Nationals take action against official after MP accuses her of 'nasty'
delivery to his home

Popular Now

   1.

Sydney woman was last seen getting into a stranger's car. Twelve months later
he's refusing to talk to police

   Missing woman Jessica Zrinski smiling while sat in a car
   2.

Brittany Higgins details alleged rape as she takes the stand in Bruce
Lehrmann's defamation action

   Brittany Higgins outside court surrounded by media.
   3.

Aboriginal elders 'at a loss' after SA council removes Acknowledgement of
Country from documents

   A profile shot of a man with a long beard wearing an akubra
   4.

‘It happens more than you think’: More than 500 e-scooter riders have ended
up in hospital during Melbourne trial

   Man laying in a hospital bed holding his arm.
   5.

Minister accepts Sydney motorists frustrated by new interchange as Rebel
Wilson vents about delays

   Rebel Wilson smiles towards the camera
   6.

Storms lash eastern Australia, bringing record rainfall and flash flooding

   The rainfall forecast for Wednesday and Thursday for south-east
   Australia

Top Stories

    1.

Brittany Higgins details alleged rape as she takes the stand in Bruce
Lehrmann's defamation action
       Brittany Higgins outside court surrounded by media.
    2.

Wong and Dutton press top Chinese official over ‘unsafe, unprofessional’
warship conduct
    3.

Sydney woman was last seen getting into a stranger's car. Twelve months later
he's refusing to talk to police
    4.

Aboriginal elders 'at a loss' after SA council removes Acknowledgement of
Country from documents
    5.

Most Women's World Cup players had 'insufficient' support, survey finds

Just In

     *

Most Women's World Cup players had 'insufficient' support, survey finds
       51m ago51 minutes agoWed 29 Nov 2023 at 11:01am
     *

One dead after US military aircraft crashes in Japan sea, after fatal
accident at Darwin in August
       1h ago1 hours agoWed 29 Nov 2023 at 10:32am
     *

Inquest hears man was released despite suspicions serious crime was committed
against Indigenous teen
       2h ago2 hours agoWed 29 Nov 2023 at 8:57am
     *

Wong and Dutton press top Chinese official over ‘unsafe, unprofessional’
warship conduct
       3h ago3 hours agoWed 29 Nov 2023 at 8:52am

   More Just In
   Back to top

Footer

   ABC News homepage
   More From ABC NEWS

   We acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the
   First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we
   live, learn, and work.

Sections

     * ABC NEWS
     * Just In
     * Watch Live
     * Politics
     * World
     * Business
     * Analysis
     * Sport
     * Science
     * Health
     * Entertainment
     * Lifestyle
     * Fact Check
     * Other

News in language

     * 中文
     * Berita Bahasa Indonesia
     * Tok Pisin

Connect with ABC News

     * Facebook
     * Instagram
     * YouTube
     * Apple News
     * X (formerly Twitter)

More from ABC News

     * Contact ABC NEWS

   This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP),
   APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright
   and cannot be reproduced.

   AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT
   (Greenwich Mean Time)
     * Editorial Policies
     * Accessibility
     * Help
     * Contact Us
     * About the ABC
     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms of Use
     * © 2023 ABC

     *
     *
     *
     *
