   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-PB2GX

   Skip to main content
   ABC News Homepage
   Search
   Loading
   (BUTTON) More from ABC

More from ABC

   (BUTTON) Close menuABC
     * ABC Home
     * News
     * Local
     * listen
     * iview
     * Everyday
     * More

Editorial Policies

   Read our editorial guiding principles
     * Accessibility
     * Help
     * Contact Us
     * About the ABC
     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms of Use
     * © 2023 ABC

     *
     *
     *
     *

     * Just In
     * Watch Live
     * Politics
     * World
     * Business
     * Analysis
     * Sport
     * Science
     * Health
     * Entertainment
     * Lifestyle
     * Fact Check
     * Other

   News HomeABC News Homepage

   Opposition labels China's denial of sonar incident propaganda
   (BUTTON) Share

Opposition labels China's denial of sonar incident propaganda

   By political reporter Georgia Roberts
   Posted Tue 21 Nov 2023 at 1:55amTuesday 21 Nov 2023 at 1:55amTue 21 Nov
   2023 at 1:55am
   Loading...
   Help keep family & friends informed by sharing this article (BUTTON)
   abc.net.au/news/china-denies-sonar-incident-peter-dutton-says-it-is-pro
   paganda/103130288
   Link copied
   (BUTTON) Copy link (BUTTON) Share

   China's denial that it sent sonar pulses that left Australian naval
   divers with minor injuries has been labelled propaganda by the
   opposition.

Key points:

     * A Chinese warship's sonar has harmed Australian divers during a UN
       mission in the East China Sea
     * China denies the incident and has criticised Australia's reaction
       to the sonar incident
     * The opposition has dismissed China's denial as propaganda, urging a
       robust response

   HMAS Toowoomba had been operating in the East China Sea, within Japan's
   exclusive economic zone, in support of a United Nations mission to
   enforce sanctions when the incident occurred.

   Naval divers were working to clear fishing nets from the Australian
   frigate's propellers when the Chinese warship began operating its
   hull-mounted sonar.

   Defence Minister Richard Marles said the sonar was activated despite
   the Chinese ship receiving multiple warnings that the personnel were
   operating below the surface.

   "Despite acknowledging Toowoomba's communications, the Chinese vessel
   approached at a closer range. Soon after, it was detected operating its
   hull-mounted sonar in a manner that posed a risk to the safety of the
   Australian divers who were forced to exit the water," the minister said
   in a statement.

   China's defence ministry denied carrying out any activities that might
   have affected Australian diving operations: "China kept a safe distance
   from the Australian ship," a statement from its defence ministry said.

   On Monday Prime Minister Anthony Albanese, speaking before Beijing
   denied the incident, said the Chinese vessel's use of its sonar was
   "dangerous, it was unsafe and unprofessional".

   He added the naval incident was harmful to efforts to repair relations
   between the two countries.

   "This certainly is an event that does do damage and we've made that
   very clear to China," he said.

   Mr Albanese did not say when the government raised its concerns with
   China, or to whom it made representations — a lack of detail that has
   been criticised by the opposition.

   The federal government has been on a campaign to stabilise relations
   with China following years of diplomatic relations being in a deep
   freeze and trade sanctions being imposed by China on several Australian
   exports.

Xi's diplomacy game is on show

   Just days before Xi Jinping and Anthony Albanese shook hands at the
   APEC summit, Australian divers were injured by Chinese sonar. It begs
   the question, is the on-stage diplomacy all for show?
   Anthony Albanese smiles while shaking hands with Xi Jinping, whose head
   is turned away from camera
   Read more

   Since Labor's election, diplomatic communications have restarted, trade
   bans have lifted, and earlier this month Mr Albanese became the first
   prime minister since 2016 to officially visit Beijing.

   Chinese Defence Ministry spokesman Wu Qian, speaking to China Daily,
   labelled Australia's comments on the sonar incident as "completely
   untrue".

   Wu went on to urge Australia to "stop making reckless and irresponsible
   accusations against China" and "to create a positive atmosphere for the
   sound development of relations between the two countries and two
   militaries".

   On Tuesday, Opposition Leader Peter Dutton said China's denial of the
   sonar incident was "propaganda and we shouldn't abide it for a second".

   "It's exactly what happens in relation to Japan, in relation to the
   Philippines, and in relation to other countries in the region," Mr
   Dutton said.

   "The fact is that there is aggressive behaviour taking place and our
   country should call it out."

   Clashes between Philippine and Chinese vessels have been occurring
   often in recent months, and in May last year tensions between Canberra
   and Beijing were heightened by the presence of a Chinese surveillance
   ship operating off the West Australian coast, close to a secretive
   naval communications base at Exmouth.
   Posted 21 Nov 202321 Nov 2023Tue 21 Nov 2023 at 1:55am
   Share
     * Copy link
     * Facebook
     * X (formerly Twitter)
     * (BUTTON)

   More on:
     * Australia
     * Defence Forces
     * Defence and National Security
     * Federal Government
     * Foreign Affairs
     * Government and Politics
     * Navy
     * World Politics

Top Stories

     *

Australia is riding another COVID wave — and the most vulnerable are the
least vaccinated
     * Andrew Greene
       Analysis by Andrew Greene

'Knows where all the bodies are buried': Inside Labor's fears over Mike
Pezzullo's sacking
     *

Man charged after woman's body found in a bathtub in Sydney's inner west
     *

'Women deserve to buy products they want where they want to buy them': The
battle over sex toy sales restrictions
     *

Fourteen members of Toowoomba religious group front court over death of
eight-year-old Elizabeth Struhs
     *

Remote and hybrid employees are taking on costs normally incurred by
employers — and there's growing resentment around it
     *

Bruce Lehrmann denies evading chief of staff's questions about night of
Brittany Higgins's alleged rape
     *

'It's snowed': Severe storms dump heavy hail, rain over northern South
Australia
     *

Chinese families of missing Malaysia Airlines MH370 plane seek compensation
in court
     *

Israel-Gaza ceasefire enters final day, as calls grow for truce and hostage
deal to be extended — as it happened
     *

Application 'error' creates potentially lengthy delay to Burrup Peninsula
World Heritage listing
     *

Boy, 10, faces trial for alleged police car ramming attempt after speeding
through town
     *

NT government seeks to arm security guards with capsicum spray, toughen
alcohol bans
     *

Federal parliamentary committee recommends doubling number of senators for
ACT and Northern Territory
     *

Why do protests keep happening at the top-secret Pine Gap military base?

Popular Now

   1.

Man charged after woman's body found in a bathtub in Sydney's inner west

   woman wear a sun hat on the beach
   2.

'Women deserve to buy products they want where they want to buy them': The
battle over sex toy sales restrictions

   Vacation Vibes vibrators in David Jones
   3.

Australia is riding another COVID wave — and the most vulnerable are the
least vaccinated

   A man stands in front of COVID-19 related illustrations.
   4.

Remote and hybrid employees are taking on costs normally incurred by
employers — and there's growing resentment around it

   Glasses and a calculator on accounting documents
   5.

'It's snowed': Severe storms dump heavy hail, rain over northern South
Australia

   Hail stones on a roof.
   6.
   Andrew Greene
   Analysis by Andrew Greene

analysis:'Knows where all the bodies are buried': Inside Labor's fears over
Mike Pezzullo's sacking

   Mike Pezzullo leans back with his arms crossed at a senate hearing

Top Stories

    1.

Australia is riding another COVID wave — and the most vulnerable are the
least vaccinated
       A man stands in front of COVID-19 related illustrations.
    2. Andrew Greene
       Analysis by Andrew Greene

'Knows where all the bodies are buried': Inside Labor's fears over Mike
Pezzullo's sacking
    3.

Man charged after woman's body found in a bathtub in Sydney's inner west
    4.

'Women deserve to buy products they want where they want to buy them': The
battle over sex toy sales restrictions
    5.

Fourteen members of Toowoomba religious group front court over death of
eight-year-old Elizabeth Struhs

Just In

     *

Chinese families of missing Malaysia Airlines MH370 plane seek compensation
in court
       45m ago45 minutes agoMon 27 Nov 2023 at 10:14am
     *

Adelaide woman charged with attempting to murder axe attack victim engaged
with hit man, court hears
       47m ago47 minutes agoMon 27 Nov 2023 at 10:11am
     *

Boy, 10, faces trial for alleged police car ramming attempt after speeding
through town
       1h ago1 hours agoMon 27 Nov 2023 at 9:16am
     *

Scientists urge Alcoa and WA government to avoid 'extinction catastrophe' and
stop mining in jarrah forests
       1h ago1 hours agoMon 27 Nov 2023 at 9:00am

   More Just In
   Back to top

Footer

   ABC News homepage
   More From ABC NEWS

   We acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the
   First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we
   live, learn, and work.

Sections

     * ABC NEWS
     * Just In
     * Watch Live
     * Politics
     * World
     * Business
     * Analysis
     * Sport
     * Science
     * Health
     * Entertainment
     * Lifestyle
     * Fact Check
     * Other

News in language

     * 中文
     * Berita Bahasa Indonesia
     * Tok Pisin

Connect with ABC News

     * Facebook
     * Instagram
     * YouTube
     * Apple News
     * X (formerly Twitter)

More from ABC News

     * Contact ABC NEWS

   This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP),
   APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright
   and cannot be reproduced.

   AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT
   (Greenwich Mean Time)
     * Editorial Policies
     * Accessibility
     * Help
     * Contact Us
     * About the ABC
     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms of Use
     * © 2023 ABC

     *
     *
     *
     *
